docs/CONFIGURATION.md, before:

# Pi-hole Configuration Guide

## Overview

This guide covers configuring Pi-hole with the configurations and settings provided in this repository.

## Configuration Files

Configuration files are located in the `config/` directory.

### Main Configuration

The `config.yml` file contains basic settings:

```yaml
ip_address: 10.0.10.50
```

Adjust the IP address to match your Pi-hole installation.

## Adding Blocklists

Pi-hole allows you to add multiple blocklists for effective ad blocking.

### Using Lists from This Repository

1. Log into the Pi-hole Admin Dashboard
2. Navigate to **Adlists**
3. Add the lists from the `lists/` directory

#### Recommended Blocklists

Popular blocklists include:

- **StevenBlack/hosts**: https://raw.githubusercontent.com/StevenBlack/hosts/master/hosts
- **Firebog Lists**: https://v.firebog.net/
- **AdAway**: https://adaway.org/hosts.txt
- **Easylist**: https://v.firebog.net/hosts/Easylist.txt
- **Easyprivacy** (Tracking): https://v.firebog.net/hosts/Easyprivacy.txt

For more information, see [LISTS.md](LISTS.md).

## Custom Allow/Block Lists

### Allowlist (Whitelist)

Edit `lists/allow-list.txt` to add domains that should NOT be blocked:

```
example.com
trusted-service.com
```

### Blocklist (Blacklist)

Edit `lists/block-list.txt` to add domains that should be blocked:

```
ads.example.com
tracker.example.com
```

## Admin Dashboard Configuration

### Basic Settings

1. **Settings** → **DNS Records**
   - Configure your DNS settings
   - Add upstream DNS servers (Cloudflare, Quad9, etc.)

2. **Settings** → **DHCP**
   - Enable/disable DHCP server
   - Set DHCP range

3. **Settings** → **Adlists**
   - Add or remove blocklists
   - Enable/disable lists

### Network Configuration

Set Pi-hole as your network's primary DNS:

- **Router Settings**: Set Pi-hole IP as the primary DNS
- **Individual Devices**: Manually set DNS to Pi-hole IP

## Upstream DNS Servers

Popular options:

- **Cloudflare**: `1.1.1.1` and `1.0.0.1`
- **Quad9**: `9.9.9.9` and `149.112.112.112`
- **OpenDNS**: `208.67.222.222` and `208.67.220.220`

## Performance Tuning

- Enable DNS caching
- Adjust blocklist refresh intervals
- Monitor query logs for insights

For more details, refer to the official Pi-hole documentation.

## Troubleshooting

### DNS Not Resolving

- Check upstream DNS configuration
- Verify Pi-hole is running: `sudo systemctl status pihole-FTL`

### Some Sites Blocked Unexpectedly

- Check allowlist (`lists/allow-list.txt`)
- Review active blocklists
- Check the query log in the admin dashboard

### Performance Issues

- Reduce number of active blocklists
- Check system resources (CPU, RAM)
- Verify DNS query response times

## Advanced Configuration

See the [Pi-hole documentation](https://docs.pi-hole.net/) for advanced configuration options.

Commit message:

Refactor documentation for blocklist and resource links
Centralized blocklist recommendations and community resources into LISTS.md and RESOURCES.md. Updated README and CONFIGURATION.md to reference these files for comprehensive information, reducing duplication and improving maintainability. Added cross-links between documentation files for easier navigation.

docs/CONFIGURATION.md, after:

# Pi-hole Configuration Guide

## Overview

This guide covers configuring Pi-hole with the configurations and settings provided in this repository.

**Related**: See [INSTALLATION.md](INSTALLATION.md) to get Pi-hole set up first, or [LISTS.md](LISTS.md) for blocklist recommendations.

## Configuration Files

Configuration files are located in the `config/` directory.

### Main Configuration

The `config.yml` file contains basic settings:

```yaml
ip_address: 10.0.10.50
```

Adjust the IP address to match your Pi-hole installation.

## Adding Blocklists

Pi-hole allows you to add multiple blocklists for effective ad blocking.

### Using Lists from This Repository

1. Log into the Pi-hole Admin Dashboard
2. Navigate to **Adlists**
3. Add the lists from the `lists/` directory

#### Recommended Blocklists

For a comprehensive list of recommended blocklists with categories and detailed information, see **[LISTS.md](LISTS.md)**.

## Custom Allow/Block Lists

### Allowlist (Whitelist)

Edit `lists/allow-list.txt` to add domains that should NOT be blocked:

```
example.com
trusted-service.com
```

### Blocklist (Blacklist)

Edit `lists/block-list.txt` to add domains that should be blocked:

```
ads.example.com
tracker.example.com
```

## Admin Dashboard Configuration

### Basic Settings

1. **Settings** → **DNS Records**
   - Configure your DNS settings
   - Add upstream DNS servers (Cloudflare, Quad9, etc.)

2. **Settings** → **DHCP**
   - Enable/disable DHCP server
   - Set DHCP range

3. **Settings** → **Adlists**
   - Add or remove blocklists
   - Enable/disable lists

### Network Configuration

Set Pi-hole as your network's primary DNS:

- **Router Settings**: Set Pi-hole IP as the primary DNS
- **Individual Devices**: Manually set DNS to Pi-hole IP

## Upstream DNS Servers

Popular options:

- **Cloudflare**: `1.1.1.1` and `1.0.0.1`
- **Quad9**: `9.9.9.9` and `149.112.112.112`
- **OpenDNS**: `208.67.222.222` and `208.67.220.220`

## Performance Tuning

- Enable DNS caching
- Adjust blocklist refresh intervals
- Monitor query logs for insights

For more details, refer to the official Pi-hole documentation.

## Troubleshooting

### DNS Not Resolving

- Check upstream DNS configuration
- Verify Pi-hole is running: `sudo systemctl status pihole-FTL`

### Some Sites Blocked Unexpectedly

- Check allowlist (`lists/allow-list.txt`)
- Review active blocklists
- Check the query log in the admin dashboard

### Performance Issues

- Reduce number of active blocklists
- Check system resources (CPU, RAM)
- Verify DNS query response times

## Advanced Configuration

See the [Pi-hole documentation](https://docs.pi-hole.net/) for advanced configuration options.
